---
title: 'The Effects of Interpersonal Relationships between Teachers and Principals'
date: 2006-12-14T00:02:00.000-08:00
draft: true
url: 
tags: 
- principals
- relationships
- education
- attrition
- new teachers
---

This is the introduction and literature review for a research proposal for a classmate's Master's Thesis. If you have any suggestions or thoughts, please feel free to post in the comments, or contact me.  

_Introduction_

It is estimated that within the first two years of service, up to 40% of all new teachers will leave the teaching profession (Hope, 1999). This high attrition of new teachers will continue to exacerbate the already critical teacher shortage.  Research has been done in many areas to examine the problem of new teacher retention, and has spurred many initiatives with varying degrees of success.  We believe that one factor influencing new teacher retention has, thus far, not been adequately explored: the effects of the interpersonal relationship between new teachers and their school principals.

_Background._

Nationwide, there is a looming crisis of teacher shortages that has already begun to show its effects, primarily in low-income schools.  Between the years of 2000 to 2010, half of the current teacher workforce is scheduled to retire (Johnson, Berg, & Donaldson, 2005).  This has created a large demand for new teachers to enter the workforce.  Annually, approximately 450,000 teachers leave their positions, but there are approximately 530,000 new teachers entering the workforce to replace them (Johnson et al., 2005).  While this may seem to be an increase in the overall number of teachers, it does not account for several key factors.  If the current attrition trends hold constant at 50% in the first five years, then at the end of five years the 80,000 teacher surplus disintegrates into an overall 185,000 teacher deficit.  This problem is compounded by the increasing demand for teachers as more schools are needed to educate the expanding youth population.

Again, there are many factors that contribute to the high attrition rate of new teachers.  Some research has shown that as much as 50% of graduates from teacher preparation programs do not enter the teaching profession (Johnson et al., 2005).  Instead, they pursue other career opportunities with promises of better salary and working conditions.  This is especially true for math and science teachers, whose skills are in high demand in our current technology-based corporate economy.  Of those graduates who do enter teaching, these market forces continue to lure them away to greener corporate pastures.

While low salaries are generally attributed as the primary factor in new teacher attrition (Hansen, 2001), research has identified other contributing factors.  One study identified the following factors as the primary concerns of new teachers: relationships with students, parents, colleagues, and supervisors; workload; knowledge of subject matter; evaluation and grading procedures; autonomy and control; and appearance and identity (how the teacher is perceived by the students) (McCann, Johannessen, & Ricca, 2005).  In our research, we will focus on the relationship between new teachers and their supervisors, specifically, the school principal.

_Key terms._

Current research uses slightly different terms in regards to teacher retention, so for the sake of consistency, we will use the following terms in our research.  Retention occurs when a teacher remains in his or her current position.  Retention is composed of turnover and attrition. Turnover (also called migration) occurs when a teacher transfers to a different school. Attrition is when a teacher leaves the teaching profession. For our study, we consider a new  teacher to be a teacher with less than three years teaching experience, as this is when they receive tenure in Utah public schools. A relationship is the interpersonal interactions composed of the following four areas: personal interaction, professional interaction, direct interaction, and indirect interaction.

_Literature Review_

_Attrition._

Teacher attrition is a problem for many school districts. In 1992, surveys reporting a 40-50% attrition rate in the next five to ten years predicted the problems that we are now facing (Billingsley & Cross, 1992). For example, the Jordan school district in Utah was short seven teachers when school started in the fall of 2006 (personal communication with Principal Paula Logan, September 26, 2006). For varying reasons, teachers are leaving the profession, and fewer new teachers are entering the workforce to fill the vacancies.

A qualitative study which interviewed 15 teachers in low-income urban schools reaffirmed the connection between teacher education, development, and retention.  The study also “found that teachers’ perspectives on their own professional development were shaped by four strands of influences, or thematic findings: their developmental levels, their school contexts, their desire for more opportunities to collaborate, and their interest in experimenting with new roles and responsibilities” (Anderson & Olsen, 2006, p. 363).  Within the realm of school context, the researchers identified the special strain on schools with high teacher turnover rates.  Veteran teachers may be those with only three years of experience, and instead of receiving professional development and mentoring commensurate with their relative inexperience, they are placed in the role of mentor to newer teachers (Anderson & Olsen, 2006). Couple this with the alarming 40% of teachers that resign within two years, and the nation is faced with a critical problem (Marlow, Inman, & Betancourt-Smith, 1997). New teachers will necessarily be needed as mentors, when they are still figuring out how everything works.

While the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB) has increased national attention on the need for _highly qualified teachers_, the act has created several unintended side effects.  Labeling schools as _needing improvement_ or _failing_ discourages the best qualified teachers from considering working in those schools.  This tends to force these schools introduce more teachers with alternative certifications.  These teachers tend to have lower retention rates, further exacerbating the problem. Chauncey Veatch, the 2002 National Teacher of the Year, expressed his concern for teacher retention: he blames a large portion of teacher attrition on the assignment of the least prepared teachers to the most demanding schools and classes (Cook, 2006). Both the labeling associated with NCLB and the great stress associated with demanding schools and classes leads to higher attrition and precipitates a vicious cycle.

_Factors affecting attrition._

A study in Texas found no correlation between teacher retention rates and scores on professional development exams or completion of a teacher education program.  The authors conclude that this finding is consistent with research that suggests there is also no correlation between performance in teacher education and certification programs and actual performance as a teacher.  If so, teacher education programs should be revised to better prepare teachers, and in so doing, increase the probability of their retention (Greiner & Smith, 2006). Since there is no correlation between teacher education program and retention rates, we can conclude that we should look to other factors to explain retention issues.

A literature review by the Harvard Project on the Next Generation of Teachers identifies several factors related to teacher retention such as: 1) teacher preparation, 2) hiring practices, 3) compensation, 4) working conditions, 5) school community, and 6) career opportunities.  The researchers note that despite the increased attention on retention, the focus should always remain on student learning, and that retaining poor teachers does not serve the greater good (Johnson et al., 2005).  A survey of teachers participating in an alternative certification program in New York revealed five factors related to teacher retention: 1) a belief in the moral importance of education, 2) career surfing/information seeking, 3) an environment of fulfillment, 4) lack of support, and 5) teaching as a temporary job.  These factors imply a need for moral leadership on the part of the school principal to positively reinforce these factors to boost teacher retention rates (Easley, 2006). Both studies suggest poor working conditions, both physically and emotionally, as a major reason for attrition.

Besides these, other factors influencing attrition may include gender issues and teacher personality types (Foster & Newman, 2005; Jepson & Forrest, 2006; Louis, Harris, & Associates, 2004).  A study in England and Wales investigated the role of gender in primary school teachers.  Males entering teaching jobs in primary schools often face identity conflicts associated with the perception that primary education is a field for women.  In an effort to retain male teachers in primary education, the authors suggest school leaders and fellow teachers proactively address organizational culture that belittles or besmirches male teachers (Foster & Newman, 2005).  Another British study found a positive correlation between perceived work stress and Type A behavior, particularly, striving for personal achievement.  The study also found a negative correlation between workplace stress and occupational commitment.  These individual factors are important as the perceived level of workplace stress had been shown in previous research to be correlated with teacher retention (Jepson & Forrest, 2006). Both of the above studies show that relationships and perceptions from teachers show a problem in the way that teachers perceive others and how they feel they are perceived. This disconnect could create problems for those that may have an especially difficult time dealing with relationship issues.

Among these challenges and difficulties, there exists a divide among teachers and principals. While both principals and teachers tend to agree that the most difficult challenge new teachers face is the communication with and involvement of parents regarding students’ progress, 39% of teachers feel that their principals do not help them learn how to deal with parents, especially in low-income schools (Louis et al., 2004).

Conventional wisdom states that the dominant cause for attrition is low teacher wages.  However, a statistical analysis of a Washington, D.C. teacher survey found the factors most likely to predict teacher retention within a particular school, in descending order, are: 1) teacher age, 2) time at the school, 3) parent and community relations, 4) quality of facilities, and finally 5) teacher salaries (Buckley, Schneider, & Shand, 2005). Parent and community relationships and quality of facilities are better predictors of retention at a particular school than salaries.  In other words, teachers are not influenced by their wages as much as they are about their personal relationships and the quality of their teaching facilities.  Imazeki cites raising teacher wages as a way to influence teachers to come to a shorthanded district and as a way to entice them to stay. This is however not always possible and the best alternative mentioned includes improving teacher conditions and mentoring programs. (Imazeki, 2005).

_Current retention initiatives._

With the majority of school districts nationwide reporting at least some form of teacher shortage, many competing proposals to recruit and retain quality teachers are gaining attention.  Alternative teacher certification programs have been used to rapidly fill teacher vacancies.  Contradictory studies have been released claiming either a significant difference or no significant difference in the performance of teachers in alternative certification programs (Hansen, 2001).  Other educational leaders are calling for increased salaries for teachers.  While some indicate that this would increase retention, others argue that surveys show teachers would rather have a cooperative community and supportive administration over a higher salary (Hansen, 2001).

Researchers also suggest professional development opportunities, like mentoring programs, would improve the teacher retention rates (Darling-Hammond & Berry, 2006).  Several studies, including one on e-mentoring, have concluded that mentoring programs increase new teacher retention (Anthony & Kritsonis, 2006; Cousin, 2001; Hope, 1999; Wayne, Youngs, & Fleischman, 2005).  One study even claims that mentoring programs reduce teacher attrition from about 50 percent to about 15 percent (Anthony & Kritsonis, 2006). W we feel that these positive outcomes may be, at least partially, linked to the opportunity for new teachers to forge personal relationships.  
The Camden New Jersey Public Schools report great success in teacher retention with a combination of programs.  The district increased the new teacher orientation from one to five days and offered a voluntary mentorship program.  Those who desire assistance may have a mentor assigned to help them for the first two years.  Also, mentoring and collaboration is available through a shared website.  The district also focuses on development of future school principals through partnership programs with local universities.  The Camden schools also work to forge value-added partnerships with suppliers.  One example is the top leadership of a textbook company coming to the district to provide a training seminar (Knox, 2005). The Camden schools seem to do an excellent job in helping new teachers become acquainted with teaching and continue the effective training by other professionals, teachers and business leaders alike.

The Maine School Administrative District No. 1 tested an induction program for new high school teachers that involved a formal orientation period, assignment of a mentor for two to three years, and group meetings with the school assistant principal every two weeks to discuss relevant issues and concerns.  The district reported a high level of success in retaining new teachers, and is planning to expand the program to all schools in the district (Bearden, 2005). This study also supports the effectiveness of mentoring and induction and supports the idea that more contact with more people, creating more relationships, might also be a factor in retention.

_Administrative duties._

Administrators exist in the school system to watch over the affairs of the schools, and to ensure that students have the opportunity to learn. One study describes how new teachers, as early as their third year of teaching, are placed as mentors of first year teachers because of a shortage of more senior teachers (Anderson & Olsen, 2006). Much of the literature focuses on the responsibilities of principals in orientating and providing induction for new teachers, not necessarily about the relationship established with new teachers. (Eggen, 2002; Louis, Harris, & Associates, 2003; McCann et al., 2005; Wayne et al., 2005). Some literature hints at the importance of relationships, but does so as a side note or afterthought (Louis, Harris, & Associates, 1992; Louis et al., 2003, 2004). Administrators, colleagues, and the community make up the interpersonal aspect of the beginning teacher's support system. The degree to which beginning teachers perceive that these three groups are supportive of their efforts can be directly related to their comfort level and their desire to remain in the profession.(Marlow et al., 1997)

One indicator of the disconnect between principals and new teachers is that only one-third of principals who recognized that new teachers need specialized training thought of it as their responsibility to provide that training (Louis et al., 2004). The literature suggests that the many principals do not feel responsible for whether a teacher succeeds or fails.  In addition, many feel that a principal’s role is solely as an administrator, therefore, studies about decreasing teacher attrition focus almost exclusively on the administrator’s job of induction and evaluations (Wayne et al., 2005). There is very little in the literature about how a principal should devote time and effort to building a relationship so that the new teacher can use that relationship as a reminder of why they chose to teach when the pressure is almost unbearable.

_Administrative relationships._

There is a statistically significant positive relationship between administrator variables and teachers’ intent to stay in the profession (Cousin, 2001). To help the teachers stay, Cousin suggested that administrators’ open clear communication channels and provide fair evaluations to help boost the commitment of novice teachers (2001).  Kilgore and Griffin found that special educators also receive little support their first years. (1998).  A common theme running through five teachers’ stories of their first year was the powerful impact of relationships; they beg a deeper look at relationships and novice teachers (Schlichte, Yssel, & Merbler, 2005).  The relationship between a new teacher and his or her colleagues, administrators, and the community directly affect the novice teacher’s comfort level and his or her desire to remain in the teaching profession (Marlow et al., 1997).

A survey of 359 former South Carolina public school teachers showed that the primary force in attrition was the lack of support from administrators (Eggen, 2002).  One study states that job satisfaction and commitment to the organization are associated with leadership support (Billingsley & Cross, 1992). It is also noted that teachers are less prone to burnout, stress, and leaving the profession when they have received external support from administrators (Billingsley & Cross, 1992).

One of the biggest problems is the perception of new teachers toward principals, and the perception of principals toward teachers. While 98% of principals feel satisfied with their relationships toward teachers, only 71% of teachers feel satisfied in the relationships they have with their principals (Louis et al., 2003). Eleven percent felt that they had a somewhat or very unsatisfactory relationship with their principals (Louis et al., 2004). Perhaps many administrators do not feel the need to improve relationships because they feel that they already have great relationships.

There is a fair amount of support for our idea that relationships increase the retention of teachers.  There is not, however, a depth of studies focused directly on the subject.  The above-mentioned studies only had a line or two about the relationship aspect.

_Problem Statement_

After reviewing the literature, we feel that the retention effect of the relationship between a new teacher and their school principal has not been adequately explored. Most of the literature deals with mentoring programs and induction programs.  We want to study the effect of the relationship with the principal on the novice teacher, not just the effect of a program implemented by the principal.  Since this area of research is so potentially expansive, we are employing delimiters to focus on just elementary school principals and novice teachers in an urban school district in Utah. Finding data to support our claims will justify more widespread opportunities for research. Our hypothesis is that our research will yield responses indicating that a large proportion of teachers that have decided to leave their current position were influenced to do so, at least in part, by the relationship with their principal.