---
layout: post
title: "✓ Pancakes"
categories: []
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _thumbnail_id: '499'
last_modified_at: 2024-11-01 19:03:50
---

Anyone who knows me knows I love to make pancakes on Saturdays while my wife sleeps in.


I typically find a pancake recipe and stick with it until I get sick of it or forget it. Then I find a new recipe that looks good.


I've learned a few things to make good pancakes from scratch:


*Buttermilk is key. The acid mixed with baking powder makes fluffier pancakes. Think vinegar and baking soda from when you were a kid.


*Heat: depending on the recipe, between 250 and 300 degrees is best. Fluffier pancakes do better with a low heat to slow cook the pancakes, while flatter pancakes cook faster with the higher heat (and you don't need the cook-all-the-way-through low heat as much because they are thin).


*1/4 cup measuring cup for putting them on the griddle is best for any kind of pancakes. Fluffier pancakes don't get too high and result in doughy insides. Flat, runny pancakes don't turn into a huge blob. Heavy pancakes don't get too big and impossible to eat (or cook through).


[This is my latest favorite recipe](http://m.allrecipes.com/recipe/162760/fluffy-pancakes) from allrecipes.com.


To get a new recipe, I usually just search on Google and find the top 1 or 2 results. The results change often enough that I can't find a previous recipe unless I saved it somewhere.


Do you have a good recipe I should use? Leave it in the comments or contact me on 
[twitter](http://twitter.com/jethrojones).
