---
layout: post
title: Staff Newsletter for 04/03/2017
categories: []
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta: {}
last_modified_at: 2024-11-01 19:03:53
---

Hi Team,


**Upcoming Calendar Events:**


This week, we will be giving kids the opportunity to register for classes for next year. Lucy will be communicating with those who will be impacted by that. Our master schedule is still not set, because it is based upon student needs and so we will be finalizing it after we know what the kids are interested in. If you would like to come down and see the draft, you are more than welcome to.


Friday is the trainmen for PEAKS testing. It is required for all staff and faculty, since we will all be involved in administering it. It will be in the library at 2:40.


**Basecamp to Microsoft Teams**


We have used Basecamp successfully for the last few years. Microsoft has a new system called Teams that is part of our Office 365 solution. It works similarly to Basecamp in some ways, but the real benefit is that it is part of what we are already using.


I’ve been using it for the last couple weeks for our Coordination of Care meeting and it is pretty slick. I’d like to join your grade level PLCs to show you how to work with it this week, and then add the rest of the team next week for the Friday early release.


If you see some invites for Teams over the next few days, you can get in and start playing, or you can wait for a walkthrough from me, Damon, or Melissa on April 14. You can see more 
[about it here](https://blogs.office.com/2016/11/02/introducing-microsoft-teams-the-chat-based-workspace-in-office-365/).


We are implementing this tool starting now so that we can use it for those who are attending summer PD events…


**Summer PD**


The Math academy flyer has been sent out from our Director of Instruction. If you are interested, please sign up for that, as I think it will be a great opportunity to help students and for you to learn some exciting ways to help our students. It is applicable to math, but also applicable to other things as well.


Thanks,


Jethro
